Previously on Outsiders...
-He's awake!
-I ran?
Like a bat out of hell, Wade.
Wade Houghton,
meet Matt Meyers.
Matt's our new
emergency manager, Wade.
I can't take the oak right now.
After what I don' to your Fa,
you need to find
his corpse, Foster.
Krake, I need the key
to the prison box.
It's gone, the key.
Are you forgiving him?
Or are you thinking something
more dire will be his fate?
(train whistle blows)
I'm ready now,
to take the oak.
Just looking for somebody.
I'm looking for my Fa.
If he's still alive, they'd
have taken him to the hospital.
I'm headed that way
if you want a ride.
You know you've got
a wild animal in your truck?
(crowd shouting)
Get down. Get down.
Hands behind your head.
HOUGHTON:
You know who this is?
Shot by Foster Farrell the VI.
Telling me the truth?
I've never told a lie
in all my life.
FULTS:
So, we should release him then?
We've got five guys out there
waiting to kick his ass
the moment we let him go.
We're keeping him here.
HOBO GERRY:
Hey there, you.
You hungry?
(woman singing in Old Tongue)
(country blues music plays)
* The dawn is up
* There's fire on the mountain
* They'll have to answer
for their crooked claim *
* The hollows
they'll surround them *
* And they'll go running back
* To the wretched realm
they came *
* Nor will
* The dogs of hell refrain
* And the land will suffer
those who came *
MEYERS:
In a nutshell,
we want to let
this situation cool down.
We want the law-abiding
people of Blackburg
to feel safe in their beds
at night.
So, no more Farrells coming
down here disturbing the peace,
causing trouble, period.
Right? Yeah?
First off,
we block access to the town.
I propose we close
the logging roads here and here.
Roads we can't close,
we post guards.
Posts will be here,
here and here,
and we're also going to
fence off mountain trails
we know the Farrells use.
You're going
to block off the mountain?
If we can, yes.
WADE: I'm-I'm-I'm sorry,
I have a question.
We have no money for a medical
clinic, but you got, like,
a jillion dollars to spend
on a 20-mile fence
around Shay Mountain?
Why don't we sidebar that?
All right, Sheriff?
We're also going to add an extra
layer of protection in town,
post armed guards at places
the Farrells have raided.
You-You know what?
This has got to be, like,
the dumbest idea I've ever heard
in my entire life.
You're talking
about armed guards,
like, standing
around in Blackburg.
It's going to make people
pretty nervous, don't you think?
I don't think they'll
feel that way at all, Sheriff.
I think they'll be tickled pink
we're making them feel safe.
Well put, Ms. Grimes.
I don't know who
invited you here, anyway.
Okay, I've requisitioned
some K-rails.
We should have crews ready
to go as early as EOW.
I tell you,
I am very happy
to have an emergency manager
here in Blackburg.
It is the best thing
that could have happened.
And what do you have to say
about the fact
that there's a Farrell
in custody
as a suspect
in Breece Dobbs' shooting?
He was a One Planet employee,
correct?
Well, that's great news
for the One Planet family.
Now we're all hoping to see
justice get done.
Excuse me.
I'm G'Winveer, the Bren'in.
Who speaks for you?
I do.
I am Moregon,
and we are the Kinnah.
We come from the shadow side
of this mountain.
The water has gone dark,
tainted by the lowlanders'
road building.
We've been searching
for shelter.
We beseech you.
Grant us the welcome guaranteed
by the old law of Brehon...
to rest
and to regain our strength.
Our lives are in your hands.
Torr thee sah-myrr o'Farrells?
We will follow
your customs, yes.
Fetch water for our guests.
Let's let them be.
Go on now.
Go on.
COUSIN WILLEM:
There's no time for strangers.
They're not strangers.
-Huh?
-They're the Kinnah.
-Kinnah?
-Aye.
They were McGintucks once,
but they departed
and formed their own clan.
They left? How long ago?
No one knows,
A hundred years, maybe more.
Well, they don't belong here.
Where's their men,
I'd like to ask?
That's a good question.
This is no time
for interlopers around here.
Do y'all have no compassion?
Are we no better
than them down below?
We live by letting live.
(dog barking)
MAN (distantly):
Hey, something smells good.
-What's for dinner?
-WOMAN: Pot roast.
Oh, you're awake.
Where am I?
You're in my house, darling.
Found you
in the middle of the road.
Looked like you was
a pile of old coonskins.
I couldn't leave you there.
Wouldn't be Christian.
Oh, I ain't introduced myself.
Name's Corinne.
What's yourn?
How long I been here?
A day, two, maybe three.
Oh, no, best we take
a look at you.
Marlon, he's my eldest,
he tends the hogs,
-so he did a real good job...
-Uh-huh.
...getting that lead out you.
He's a good boy,
not like this one here.
No, that's not for you.
That's for our guest.
Now get.
(Corinne sighs)
(Corinne chuckles)
Here now, you need
to get your strength up.
Boomer stew, we call it.
(chuckles)
It's real good.
(Big Foster groans)
I need to...
I need to get to my home.
-No.
-(groans)
You don't have
your strength up yet.
I'll come back,
see when you's ready
to put something
in your stomach.
Oh no, wait, wait.
Hey.
No...
No, no, now,
don't wile yourself.
There's no place
for you to go
and nothing
for you to do but rest.
-No, but hey...
-We'll talk soon.
No, hey, hey. Hey!
(groans)
Oh, no.
FEMALE DETECTIVE (on monitor):
So, you shot him?
How many times was it?
Now, why aren't you
listening to me?
I told you I didn't
shoot this man.
Come on, Mr. Farrell.
You know you did,
and we know you did,
so just tell us
how it went down.
I didn't shoot nobody.
We already know what happened.
Okay, you help yourself
if you talk to us.
Tell us what you
did with the gun.
-What gun?
-The one you used
-to kill Breece Dobbs.
-I didn't have no gun.
I did not even shoot that man.
I told you who did.
You got scared,
so you shot him.
Okay, I get that.
I might have done
the same thing.
Well, good for you.
I didn't shoot nobody.
Where's Wade Houghton?
FEMALE DETECTIVE:
He's not here right now.
You're not helping us
to help you here, my friend.
I know the judge
and he'll go easy on you,
get you out of here,
but only if you help us.
Is this what
y'all do all the time,
just lock somebody in a room
and don't listen
to a damn thing they say?
Is that what happens down here?
Take us through it again.
(indistinct conversation)
-We're getting there.
-Well, yeah.
I didn't hear anything
to support the idea
that he killed a person.
It's a process.
Takes time, Sheriff.
Yeah, we've got enough
to charge him.
I'm sorry.
I mean, he's sitting there
telling you
he didn't kill nobody.
He ain't got a murder weapon.
I mean, thank y'all very much
for coming down.
I think myself and my men
will take it from here.
Uh, the state police
have authority on this, Wade.
-Excuse me?
-Yeah,
the state's attorney
brought them in, okay?
-Thank you so much.
-You bet.
This, uh, goes a long way
to quelling people's fears.
We'll see about
getting that on the docket
for arraignment today.
Great, nice work.
Thank you.
And thank you, Wade.
Thank you for getting
on board with this.
I was worried
about this Dobbs thing,
but this will be good for us,
and for you...
your image, you know?
Restore confidence...
you know what I mean?
(knock on door)
Come.
You call for me, Bren'in?
Hasil, yes.
When them policemen
came up here,
they took our peace of mind
'cause we were unawares.
That can't happen again.
-I agree.
-Good.
I've decided
that we need a patrol.
We need eyes
all over this hill
and I think you're the man
to be set to that task.
Well, you know the ways
between our world and theirs,
and you're strong
and you're loyal.
Aren't you?
Like I said, you ain't got
nothing to worry about.
I'm here now.
You, uh, you seen Lil Foster
on your travels by chance?
I have not.
Well, you do,
you tell him come see me.
Yes, ma'am.
(sighs)
Bren'in?
Yes?
You trust them?
Those Kinnah ladies?
I mean, they say
they're starving and weak,
but they don't seem
that way to me.
They seem like
they just dressed up,
playing some kind of game.
(chuckles)
They-They do have some strange
ways about them, it's true.
No, I think they're fleecers,
flimflammers.
I think they're bilking us.
Hasil, this is our way.
We give freely and we can't
afford more enemies.
You know, you spent
too much time down there.
All I'm saying is, what if
they're up to something else?
I hear you,
but they speak our language.
They're family.
(Hasil sighs)
Good day to you, Bren'in.
How are the Kinnah settling in?
Well.
We are grateful.
We hope we won't be
a bother to you much longer.
Oh, not a bother.
You need any help
to situate yourself,
you just ask.
You're generous and kind.
A true leader.
I admit when we arrived,
I was taken by
how young thou were.
Such a cub to be burdened
with this task.
(G'Win chuckles)
I hadn't thought of myself
as a cub in a long while,
but... it's true.
The Oak only passed
to me recently.
All the more impressive
that it be so
and yet you are so able.
I saw you stand
to your dissenters.
But you be fair
and you gave them an ear.
(speaks Old Tongue)
It's no small task to hold
thy ground and not appear rigid.
Questions only breed
more questions, like weeds.
They can choke
the path you walk.
Your people were
wise to choose thee.
Once all the heads of
the mountain clans were women.
The Bren'in handed
from mother to daughter
in an unbroken line.
We moved to the far side
of Shay Mountain
where we could practice
our way in peace.
Not much can grow there,
I've heard.
It's a harsh way to live.
It's also the right way.
And as you see, we endured.
So, you have no men among you?
Men only cause pain...
but I don't need
to tell thee that.
Pardon?
I can see it.
Plain on thy face.
You know well
the pain men bring.
How do you maintain
your number then?
When it's time for such things,
men are easy enough to come by.
(chuckles)
What are you doing here,
dumbass?
You've got chores to do.
Get up there, go on!
Hey... leave him be.
(sighs)
How you doing, big fella?
You got your hunger up yet?
Yeah?
You need a little bit more care.
Oh, there.
Yeah, ain't that nice?
Mm... that's pretty.
Why you got me tied?
Oh, you were thrashing from
the fevers, something fierce.
I was afraid you were gonna...
throw yourself
right out the bed.
Hey, Lord, ain't you pretty.
You're like socks on a rooster.
Well, well,
I ain't got a fever no more...
so... you can loose me now.
Oh, shh...
I know what you need.
What?
(moans)
Yeah, you must be hungry
for something more than vittles.
Oh... what are you...
I got what you need.
No, hey.
Oh-ho.
Look, uh...
no, hey, hey, hey, no, no, no,
stop, stop, stop, okay? Okay?
I'm a married man.
Hell, I'm married...
to a monster.
-Now you need some
love and tender care. -No.
-Mm-mm. Mm-mm.
-I know I do.
(footsteps approaching)
Where'd you put
the goddamn remote?
You probably sat on it.
Did you check up your ass?
It ain't up my ass, bitch.
Get the hell out of here.
(Big Foster groans)
Relax now and let me
take care of you.
(groans)
Oh, see?
You ain't even got the
proper strength to be a man.
-No.
-Oh.
Don't fret.
I've got plenty experience
working with a wet noodle.
(heavy breathing, moaning)
All right,
we are commencing a scout.
Now we can't get caught
like we was, not ever again.
What I reckon is that
they're already out there
and they're out there watching.
Each man's going to
survey a stretch of woods.
Now we want to know
where they are
without them knowing
nothing about us,
so we are gonna go quiet.
We walk, no bikes.
Well, then...
I mean, that's... that's
going to take all day on foot.
No vehicles.
You understand me?
Barnabis, I want you to take
the East Creek Falls.
Enoch, I want you to get eyes
up on Badger Ridge.
What about you?
I'm going to make sure we're
all shored up over on the south
down by The Drop.
Y'all finished,
you come back to my place,
you see me, tell me
what you seen. All right?
-I got it.
-Good.
Let's go.
The Drop,
it's the barest road from here.
Hell, he'll be back
before I've even gone halfway.
Best get to it then.
Oh, this is stupid.
I mean, he...
he's been down in that town
sniffing around
that Lostie girl so much,
he don't even know
what's what.
-What are you going to do?
-Well...
sure as hell ain't
going to walk all that way.
That's all I know.
(lock buzzes, latch clicks)
I'll take you down
to the courthouse.
You've got a hearing.
-What's this?
-It's all right.
They have to do it.
Calm down,
it's all right.
-What?
-It's all right. Come on.
-Why don't you get away from me,
boy. -Hey, hey, hey!
Back off now!
Hey! Back off!
Hey, get back!
Put that away, right now!
Hey, calm it down.
Hands off! Calm down.
Stop, listen to me!
Look at me now!
Don't worry about him, okay?
Goddamn it, this ain't
about me or you anymore.
This is about the law.
Okay, you can get violent
if you want to,
but if you strike an officer,
it's going to give them
twice as many reasons
to hold you.
You got to work with me.
Give me your hands.
Okay, you're gonna follow me.
Thank you.
This is the matter
of the Commonwealth of Kentucky
v. Foster Farrell the VIII.
-Is that correct?
-Yes, Your Honor.
Jack Marsil
for the Commonwealth.
Sophia Bennett
for the defense, Your Honor.
And the charges are
wanton endangerment
in the first,
assault in the first,
conspiracy to commit murder,
murder.
-Is that correct, Mr. Marcel?
-Yes, Your Honor.
How about it, Ms. Bennett?
How's your client plead?
Get up.
You want me to talk now?
JUDGE:
Yes, Mr. Farrell, your plea.
Well, like I told this one,
I didn't kill nobody.
I didn't hurt nobody.
I come down here
-to find the one who did.
-Mr. Farrell.
You look like a reputable man.
-Hold on a second.
-I-I was told that I...
-Mr. Farrell, sir.
I'm not sure Ms. Bennett
explained to you
-how all this works.
-I'm sorry, Your Honor.
I literally got this case
five minutes ago.
Mr. Farrell,
all I need from you
is for you to tell me
whether you are guilty
of the crimes mentioned or not.
I didn't kill nobody.
Never.
So, that's not guilty,
then that's what I am,
not guilty.
Thank you.
So entered.
Now, to the matter of bail,
Mr. Marsil.
MARSIL:
The Commonwealth requests
that the defendant
be held without bail.
This man, he has
no ties to the community,
he doesn't even have
a social security number.
-I don't have what?
-Now you couple that
with the fact
that he is a member
of the infamous Farrell clan,
with intimate knowledge
of mountain survival,
frankly, it's a, it's a miracle
-we have him in custody at all.
-Shit.
He is the very definition
of a flight risk, Your Honor.
All that is, strictly
speaking, true, Your Honor...
but Mr. Farrell
has no prior criminal record
and it does not appear
that the prosecution
has given enough evidence
in order...
I think I've heard enough,
Ms. Bennett.
Bail is denied.
(gavel bangs)
(door opens and closes)
HOUGHTON:
Hey, Ledda.
Hey, let's go and fix
some lunch.
I've been at court all morning,
I ain't eaten, I'm starving.
You have court for the Farrell
that you caught?
Where'd you hear that?
I got a call.
They're saying
that he's the one who...
Yeah, well,
don't get your hopes up.
It ain't as cut and dried
as some folks might like.
What do you mean?
I mean, I don't think
he killed him.
In fact, I know he didn't.
You know, based on what?
Based on he told me
and I believe him.
(chuckles)
I do not understand you, Wade.
(laughing):
You are some kind of man.
Listen, I know
you want to sort this out.
No, you know jack and shit...
-Hey.
-...and that is clear.
I mean, you say that you want
to solve Breece's murder
-and then it's right here...
-Listen....
...falls right into your lap,
and you say no?
You just toss it out
in the garbage?
Hey,
what are you talking about?
There's not any evidence.
All we know about this man
is he's a Farrell.
What you want, to convict him
on the basis of that?
I don't know
what to do with you.
-I have fought for you,
for years. -Wait, wait.
I have fought,
and you know what?
Everyone's right.
-You are scared of them,
plain and simple. -Wha...
hey, wait a minute here.
What's this about?
The other day you're saying
this has nothing to do
-with the Farrells.
-No.
-Now you say... you're saying...
-No, that's not the point.
-It's all the coal company.
-Okay, no, I'm done.
-Flipping and flopping all
over the place. -You hear me?
I am done defending you.
Just... let them
say what they like.
-(kicks door)
-(Big Foster groans)
(overlapping argument)
MAN: I need my pipe!
CORINNE:
I don't care what you need.
What about what I need?
-You're never here. -MAN: You
don't need shit, woman.
CORINNE: Oh, I don't need shit?
(overlapping argument)
(Corinne shouts)
(grunts)
CORINNE: Sit down
on the goddamn couch!
MAN: I ain't sitting nowhere!
I need my pipe!
(door bangs shut)
(groans)
Hi.
You, uh... want some of these?
Some of those right there?
Not gonna hurt you.
Come on, take them.
(breathing heavily)
There you go.
You ain't going
to tell my mama?
No.
I ain't going to tell no one.
Promise.
Go on.
Now you just... you go back over
there and stay over there, okay?
You just keep quiet.
Shh, shh, shh, shh, shh.
(groans)
(lighter flicks, man inhales)
(grunts)
Hey, you're not supposed to...!
Get back here, you!
(Big Foster grunts)
(groans)
I got him good, Pa.
Bren'in, there's a situation
at Big Foster's place.
Hey, what is going on?
Stop.
I said stop.
Ayn sah-wyl.
Bren'in, what's the matter?
What is going on?
Th-This house belongs to...
To your former husband.
Yes.
Y-You have no right
to ransack it.
We were told
that your man had passed
and no soul dwelled here.
(G'Win stammers)
No... the house is empty,
yes, but...
Oh... I see.
You've not finished the
grieving of your terrible loss.
I'm sorry.
We meant no offense by it.
We will find somewhere else.
No.
No, you're right.
Better to make it a home
than let it fall to ruin.
Ged badeh, Bren'in.
(engine revving)
Shit!
(groans)
(grunts)
Oh, hell.
Excuse me.
(Houghton clears throat)
(muttering):
Yeah, check.. yeah.
Hey, uh, Gardner.
Hmm?
-Oh, hey, Wade.
-You got a moment to talk?
Yeah, sure.
Uh, what can I do you for?
(indistinct conversation)
Say, if I see a person,
and, uh, they're not getting
even like a...
a half-decent representation.
Is this a friend or relation?
Uh, it's a... it's a
professional acquaintance.
Uh-huh, criminal case then?
Uh, yeah, a criminal case.
So, I s-see this happening.
I mean, uh, what are,
what are my options?
Well, you... you talk
to this person,
try to convince them
to hire a better lawyer?
You want me
to keep talking to you?
-Yeah.
-Uh...
um...
uh, like, I mean,
they-they ain't got no money.
-Oh, a P.D.?
-Yeah.
Got a public defender,
right.
How's the case
against this person?
It's thin.
I mean, it's real thin.
It's pretty much
just guilt by association.
Well...
then you just hope it gets
tossed out before trial
or dismissed during.
Just let the system
take care of it.
Yeah, yeah, I mean,
that's the thing, Dan.
I mean, I just thought...
I mean, um,
would-would you consider,
like, uh, taking on
a case like that?
I mean, just out of
a sense of justice, you know?
You're the best lawyer around
and, uh...
I've got
to give you credit, Wade.
You told me you loved me before
you tried to stick it in.
I don't know about that,
but, um...
I... mean, I think this man
deserves a proper defense.
I assume we're talking
about that Farrell.
Man, why do you care?
I mean, why do you want to
get mixed up with all that?
It's the right thing to do.
Yeah, if you say so,
but it's not the smart thing.
That case, in this town,
that guy's going away.
And I've been around
long enough to know
not to stand in front of
a freight train like that.
And neither should you.
Look what you've
done to yourself.
It's a crying shame.
You're not
such a big man now, are you?
What if I shot you
in the face with your own gun?
Huh?
You like that?
That's mine, boy!
-I found it!
-CORINNE: That's enough.
(overlapping arguing)
Shut it!
(sighs)
Took you into my home,
bent over backward
to make you feel good...
and look at you.
You ain't even
the least bit thankful
for how good I've been to you.
This doesn't mean that I'm
going to give up on you, no sir.
I've got big plans for you.
I'm going to teach you
graciousness
if it's the last thing I do,
I will.
Again.
No.
You're gonna need every inch
of the love and kindness
we're gonna give you.
Stitch him up.
(grunting, breathing heavily)
That's it.
Another stitch.
Bren'in, a moment?
Of course.
I know it's a ways off,
but I'm worried
about the coming winter,
Bren'in.
Every prognostication indicates
it'll be a long one and hard.
I'm not sure how precisely
we'll be able to feed
any extra mouths.
The Kinnah, you mean?
So, you're questioning
my decision,
the decision of your Bren'in
to allow them to stay.
Is that what you're
wasting all your wind on?
I just wanted to bring
the fact to your attention.
Fine, you have.
There are stories about them
passed down.
Some say they're thieves.
You've seen what they done
at Big Foster's place.
It don't make
none of those stories true.
The Kinnah ain't strangers.
They're clan.
You'll see for yourself
at the ceilidh tonight.
A ceilidh?
They ain't got but what
they carried in on their backs,
so we'll share with them
what's ours.
A gifting.
HASIL:
You took wheels.
Goddamn it, I told you.
I was only wanting to
go faster, get more done like.
Where is he?
Now it's bad enough
you could have been seen,
but you might have broken
a piece of gear we sorely need.
Yeah, well, I said I was sorry.
Sorry is not what
we need right now, brother.
What we need is to step up
and protect this family
because it's the only one
we've got.
You got me?
Damn, man.
Shit.
(lock buzzes, latch clicks)
I'll take you up to county now
while you wait on your trial.
Arms above your head.
What do we look like to you,
when y'all came up our mountain?
We look like animals and vermin,
evil spirits, what?
Tell you the truth...
...I don't remember anything.
Hands at your waist.
We could have killed
every single one of y'all...
...but we didn't...
because y'all are kin,
like human beings.
We got laws, too.
Courts and what-what do y'all
call them down here, trials?
We use them, but...
not just to put
some problem in a cage,
but to heal people.
All right, I'm going to do
everything I can, okay?
I promise you that.
I believe you, Wade.
But if you're lying,
like you were before...
...you're going to pay for it.
Okay, go.
(door opens)
Bren'in, can I talk to you
for a minute?
What is it?
I thought you'd want to know.
It's, uh, Asa.
Bury it.
Not in our grounds,
halfway down the mountain.
He never was one of us,
not really...
...but he wasn't
one of them, neither.
He belongs in between.
(chains rattling)
(Big Foster breathing heavily)
You go outside...
and you run as far as you can
and don't you never come back.
Okay?
Go.
(groans)
Hey.
Can I talk to you for a second?
Look, if this is about earlier,
-can we just...
-No, it's, uh, something...
I found that in the mail.
Why are they
sending that to you?
Um...
I have cancer.
I had a pain in my side and I,
uh, I didn't think much of it,
but I went to get it
checked out.
It was a couple weeks back...
and they, uh, took some tests
and got the results...
and, uh... it's cancer.
It's pancreatic cancer.
(chuckles)
Oh.
Ah.
(under breath): Wow.
Yeah.
Uh, are they, uh... they...?
-Yeah.
-Sure, yeah.
As sure as they can be.
Oh.
I'm... I'm sorry, Wade.
I-I'm sorry.
There just hasn't been a good
time to tell you...
or anyone.
-Yeah. -But now...
now I guess you know.
Yeah.
Hey, kids, come downstairs,
supper's almost ready!
(birds chirping)
-MAN (on TV): Hey, what's going
on here? -(flies buzzing)
Why aren't you preparing?
What's the big idea?
WOMAN (on TV): The idea is
coming into this flat without...
MAN (on TV):
Look, sister, this is an alert.
So, let's deal with it...
(TV continues playing faintly)
(birds chirping)
GUARD:
Opening.
(lock buzzes, latch clicks)
(lock buzzes)
They're here.
We'll set him in place.
(lock buzzes, latch clicks)
(breathes shakily)
(crowd cheering)
(upbeat music playing)
Blessings for you.
Here you are.
(indistinct conversation)
Bren'in, the Kinnah
thank you and your people
for this gifting.
Sah-wyl croeso thee.
The moon nears a fullness.
It's so beautiful from up here.
We never saw it,
or the stars, so clear
from down in our world.
A sign of great change to come,
dost thou agree?
How so?
Your people have forgot so many
of the things
the mountain knows.
I'm glad to be here,
so in time,
I may remind you.
(woman shouts)
(music stops, people muttering)
Excuse me. Excuse me.
(muttering):
Where is she?
Calling a Circle.
(breathing heavily)
(people gasp)